---
title: "Applying for Master's in CS at US Graduate Schools - My 2¢"
published: true
---

**Hello World!**

The master's graduate school application process was one of the most time consuming, mentally exhaustive periods of my life. In this blog post, I have compiled a list of resources that will help you as much as it helped me, to write a proper application, to select graduate schools based on factors other than "popularity / ranking" among other things.

There are a LOT of blogs already written on this topic. Here is a list of the top ones. Most of them talk about PhD applications, but certain aspects of the application, like the SOP and LOR have relevance in master's applications, especially if you're aiming for a research based master's program.  

1. <a href="http://web.archive.org/web/20190714154122/http://www.pgbovine.net/PhD-application-essay-examples.htm" target="_top">Philip Guo's</a> blog covers PhD applications, but he has given real Statement of Purposes written by students who got admitted to work with him.

2. <a href="http://matt.might.net/articles/how-to-apply-and-get-in-to-graduate-school-in-science-mathematics-engineering-or-computer-science/" target="_top">Matt Might</a> writes about all things graduate school applicants need to know before applying in this blog.

3. <a href="http://cs.brown.edu/~sk/Memos/Grad-School-Recos/" target="_top">Shriram Krishnamurthi</a> has laid out the fundamentals one should follow while writing Letter of Recommendations. As Indians, we know most of our professors offload that task to us..so this is pretty helpful!

4. <a href="https://medium.com/@vijayc/how-to-pick-a-grad-school-for-a-phd-in-computer-science-a5ce7dceb246" target="_top">Vijay Chidambaram</a> is a System's Professor at UT Austin. He covers all aspects of picking a grad school based on factors like advisor suitability, research match, location, etc. These factors are a LOT more important than the usual "popularity based" ranking that we see on many ranked lists like US News, QS, Times, etc.

5. <a href="http://precog.iiitd.edu.in/graduate-school-faqs.html" target="_top">This</a> blog covers almost all aspects of grad school applications, from an Indian Perspective. Check out the videos mentioned on the bottom with UChicago Prof. Ben Zhao! (Check out Ben Zhao on Quora!) Very informative.


Rank Lists based on popularity / surveys:
1. [US News](https://www.usnews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-science-schools/computer-science-rankings)
2. [QS](https://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/university-subject-rankings/2020/computer-science-information-systems) 
2. [Times](https://www.timeshighereducation.com/world-university-rankings/2020/world-ranking#!/page/0/length/25/locations/US/subjects/3081/sort_by/rank/sort_order/asc/cols/stats) 

Rank Lists based on research output / metrics:
1. [CSRankings](https://csrankings.org)
2. [CS Metrics](http://csmetrics.org/)
3. [NRC Rankings](https://www.chronicle.com/article/NRC-Rankings-Overview-/124721/)


**Here are my 2¢ on components of the application that I feel are important:**

* **Find a program that is the perfect fit for your interest:**  Absolutely important. If you are in a program that is a good fit with your interests, you're more likely to find opportunities that excite you. More professors to work with, better courses, and your cohort /  alumni from that program will also be able to help you a lot with finding opportunities.  The easiest way to find programs that are a fit is to find out the number of faculty working in that area, their current interests (most faculty pages are up to date with latest research info), and talking to alumni from that program through LinkedIn.

* **GRE & GPA matter more than you think:**  Most schools get 1k+ applications and they most likely put a check on the GRE and GPA as the first filtering step. CS schools care about the quant section a lot. 165+ is definitely helpful. The next criteria is GPA. Your transcripts help the reviewers in determining how good your performance was in core computing subjects. Most schools really care about the last two years of undergrad. Some applications even ask you to fill the average GPA of the last two years. A good GRE score can sometimes help, but a bad GRE score will hurt you a lot! Similarly for GPA, a good GPA will help, but a bad one will definitely hurt you a lot. Most schools publish the admissions data (average GRE, average GPA of admitted applicants), and it's a good idea to check and determine whether your scores are relatively competitive to the school.

* **Letters of Recommendations can REALLY help:**  If your GRE or GPA are lacking, here's where letters can really help. Let's say you had a bad performance in a particular subject's theory paper, but excelled in practicals and project work. You can ask your professor to highlight that aspect more. Who writes your LOR matters, but the content of the letter is what grabs attention more. A good LOR is the one that puts forward more quantitive than qualitative data. For ex: Writing about how "nicely" the student performed in class is not helpful, but establishing numbers, such as "XYZ was among the top 20 students I have ever taught" will help the reviewer in gauging the applicant's performance. A letter should always focus on what the applicant was able to accomplish and how they accomplished it. 

* **Statement of Purpose (should not be taken lightly):** My SOP is a piece of writing that I am extremely proud of. Some pointers for writing it, that helped me: 

  1. Write in bursts so you have time to reflect and generate new ideas for improvement. Give it plenty of time, I'm talking many months, so you can develop the document.
  2.  Be very concise. Be specific as to why this program and why this school. The review committee has to know your entire journey in that document. Use this document to explain why you have a bad GPA or why you didn't perform well on the GRE. Your other documents (Letters for ex.) should have a mention of it as well.
  3.  The review committee uses this document to gauge 
      1. Whether you're good at communication (research requires a lot of writing)
      2. Which sub-field you really want to get into within the major subject. The SOP is a good way to communicate to the schools about which professors you want         to work with, and what you plan to do with your degree, and how you will contribute to the school's overall goals and objectives.
  4. Remember your SOP is passed down to some professors, and they don't have a lot of time to read it. Most professors spend up to 2 minutes on each application. Keep the SOP free of any GRE level words, keep it concise and to the point. Someone should get an overview of your journey even if they skim through the paragraphs. 
  5. **PLEASE USE LATEX!!!** Make it as readable as possible. Use proper & equal margins on all sides. Your name should be on the header along with the application term and program you're applying to (For ex: Fall 2020 MS CS).
  
  
Ending note - The graduate application process is very random, no one can predict it! So if you want to apply to a school which seems out of your reach, you should still apply! You never know what will happen :) 



